72532: Improve Content in Optional Value Keys (#1063)
replicatedhq/replicated-docs: docs/vendor/helm-optional-value-keys.md

# Configuring Optional Value Keys

> > This topic applies to both native Helm and Replicated Helm installations.

Reviewer: I did a search, and it looks like this is the only topic that has a  `> This topic applies to both native Helm and Replicated Helm installations.` blurb. Perhaps this could be combined with `The Helm chart values.yaml file is not a static mapping in an application. It is possible to either remove or include values when certain conditions are met` into more of the standard topic sentence format that we use elsewhere?

Author: Good idea.

> If the Helm chart `values.yaml` contains a static value that must be removed when deploying using the Replicated app manager, set the value to `"null"` (including the quotation marks) in the HelmChart custom resource manifest file.

Reviewer: The heading of this section is "Remove Values", but I think it sounds like it's actually _excluding_ the values from a given deployment. In contrast, removing might suggest that something already was deployed and now we want to remove it. Maybe the section could be called Exclude Values instead? This would also mirror the format of the "Include Values"

Similarly: 
>If the Helm chart `values.yaml` contains a static value that must be ~~removed~~ excluded when deploying using the Replicated app manager

Author: You're right, it's not being removed. Helm actually calls this "deleting a default key", then describes it as "overriding". It's a good idea to change it, and I've chosen "Override Values". Thanks for catching this.

If the Helm chart `values.yaml` contains a static value that must be removed when deploying using the Replicated app manager, set the value to `"null"` (including the quotation marks) in the HelmChart custom resource manifest file.

> Typically this situation happens when you are including a community chart as a dependency in your own chart. You cannot control how the community chart is built and structured, and you might want to change some of the default behavior that the community chart does not easily expose. For example, Kubernetes only supports one livenessProbe handler. You can set a default livenessProbe handler to `"null"` and enable your preferred handler. For more information, see [Deleting a Default Key](https://helm.sh/docs/chart_template_guide/values_files/#deleting-a-default-key) in the Helm documentation.

Reviewer 2: I like this piece.  I'd only suggest removing the last sentences about liveness probes since that is a specific example that may vary from chart to chart.  The helm docs show that example and give context around it as it pertains to a specific example chart, so I think the first bit is probably all we need here.

> Typically this situation happens when you are including a community chart as a dependency in your own chart. You cannot control how the community chart is built and structured, and you might want to change some of the default behavior that the community chart does not easily expose. For example, Kubernetes only supports one livenessProbe handler. You can set a default livenessProbe handler to `"null"` and enable your preferred handler. For more information, see [Deleting a Default Key](https://helm.sh/docs/chart_template_guide/values_files/#deleting-a-default-key) in the Helm documentation.

Author: Cool, done, thanks. It's good to have a second opinion.

## Include Values

Some advanced use cases involve writing values to a values file only if there is a value to apply. For example, if a customer has the option to configure a different value than the default value in your file, such as setting the database option they want to use. You can include an optional value key so that your application can dynamically include it based on a `when` condition.

**Example**

For example, in the Bitnami Wordpress[chart.yaml.](https://github.com/bitnami/charts/blob/main/bitnami/wordpress/Chart.yaml) chart, there is a reference to mariadb. This is configured through the [values.yaml](https://github.com/bitnami/charts/blob/main/bitnami/wordpress/values.yaml#L1086):

```yaml

> mariadb:
>   ## @param mariadb.enabled Deploy a MariaDB server to satisfy the applications database requirements
>   ## To use an external database set this to false and configure the `externalDatabase.*` parameters
>   ##
>   enabled: true
>   ## External Database Configuration
>   ## All of these values are only used if `mariadb.enabled=false`
>   ##
>   externalDatabase:
>   ## @param externalDatabase.host External Database server host
>   ##
>   host: localhost
>   ## @param externalDatabase.port External Database server port
>   ##
>   port: 3306
>   ## @param externalDatabase.user External Database username
>   ##
>   user: bn_wordpress
>   ## @param externalDatabase.password External Database user password
>   ##
>   password: ""
>   ## @param externalDatabase.database External Database database name
>   ##
>   database: bitnami_wordpress

Reviewer 2: `externalDatabase` is it's own values section outside of `mariadb`, so I just modified the indentations for a few lines.  It's also not _right_ next to the `mariadb.enabled` part, so in my suggestion I added an ellipses to indicate this.  Not sure if we have prior examples of where we omit sections for brevity like that.
```suggestion
mariadb:
  ## @param mariadb.enabled Deploy a MariaDB server to satisfy the applications database requirements
  ## To use an external database set this to false and configure the `externalDatabase.*` parameters
  ##
  enabled: true
...
## External Database Configuration
## All of these values are only used if `mariadb.enabled=false`
##
externalDatabase:
  ## @param externalDatabase.host External Database server host
  ##
  host: localhost
  ## @param externalDatabase.port External Database server port
  ##
  port: 3306
  ## @param externalDatabase.user External Database username
  ##
  user: bn_wordpress
  ## @param externalDatabase.password External Database user password
  ##
  password: ""
  ## @param externalDatabase.database External Database database name
  ##
  database: bitnami_wordpress
```

```
If a user wants to configure an external database, you can enable this dynamically through your deployment by adding an `optionalValues` section to the `kind: HelmChart` custom resource, instead of attempting to modify the render logic in the Helm chart.

The `optionalValues` section includes a `when` condition that instructs the app manager how to determine if these keys should be merged. It also includes a `recursiveMerge` field that defines how to merge the dataset.

For example, the HelmChart custom resource can be configured as follows:

```
apiVersion: kots.io/v1beta1
kind: HelmChart
metadata:
  name: wordpress
spec:
  # chart identifies a matching chart from a .tgz
  chart:
    name: wordpress
    chartVersion: 15.3.2

  # values are used in the customer environment, as a pre-render step
  # these values will be supplied to helm template
  values:
    mariadb:

>       enabled: repl{{ ConfigOptionEquals `external_db_type` `embeddedDatabase`}}

Reviewer 2: I think having `mariadb_type` makes sense because the config option would be a radio button toggle where the end-user would choose either `embeddedDatabase` or `externalDatabase`.  If it's `embeddedDatabase`, then this would evaluate to `true` and the wordpress chart would deploy it's own mariadb instance.  If not, then it would evaluate to `false`, the chart would not deploy a mariadb instance and the optional values below would come into play.

>       enabled: repl{{ ConfigOptionEquals `external_db_type` `embeddedDatabase`}}

Reviewer 2: I think having `mariadb_type` makes sense because the config option would be a radio button toggle _named_ `mariadb_type` where the end-user would choose either the value `embeddedDatabase` or `externalDatabase`.  Thinking about it more, this is somewhat confusing since the field in the `values.yaml` is also named `externalDatabase`.  How about we change the example so that the config option is named `mariadb_type` and the possible values are just `embedded` or `external` to make that differentiation more clear?

If it's `embedded`, then this template function would evaluate to `true` and the wordpress chart would deploy it's own mariadb instance.  If it's `external`, then it would evaluate to `false`, the chart would not deploy a mariadb instance and the optional values below would come into play.

```suggestion
      enabled: repl{{ ConfigOptionEquals `mariadb_type` `embedded`}}
```

>       enabled: repl{{ ConfigOptionEquals `external_db_type` `embeddedDatabase`}}

Author: Thank you so much for the ideas and for explaining the logic. This is what I was struggling to understand.

  optionalValues:

>     - when: "repl{{ ConfigOptionEquals `external_db_type` `embeddedDatabase`}}"

Author: Based on the change in the values above, I changed this value to `external_db_type` also.  Is that correct?

Reviewer 2: Same as above, regarding the field name.

For this one, we want to check if the config option equals `externalDatabase` since we only want these optional values being applied if the user chose to use their own external mariadb instance.

```suggestion
    - when: "repl{{ ConfigOptionEquals `external_db_type` `externalDatabase`}}"
```

      recursiveMerge: false
      values:

>         externalDatabase.host: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_host`}}"
>         externalDatabase.user: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_user`}}"
>         externalDatabase.password: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_password`}}"
>         externalDatabase.database: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_database`}}"
>         externalDatabase.port: "repl{{ `external_ db_port`}}"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        externalDatabase:
          host: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_host`}}"
          user: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_user`}}"
          password: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_password`}}"
          database: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_database`}}"
          port: "repl{{ `external_ db_port`}}"
```

  # builder values provide a way to render the chart with all images
  # and manifests. this is used in replicated to create airgap packages
  builder:
    mariadb:
      enabled: true
```

> The HelmChart YAML above results in the following `values.yaml` if a user selects `external_db_type`:

Author: @cbodonnell Again, I change this to `external_db_type` for consistency. Is it correct?

Reviewer 2: This would result if a user selects an `external_db_type` of `embeddedDatabase`.

Or a `mariadb_type` of `embeddedDatabase` if we go with the original name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The HelmChart YAML above results in the following `values.yaml` if a user selects a `mariadb_type` of `external`:
```

```yaml
mariadb:
  enabled: false

>   externalDatabase:
>     host: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_host`}}"
>     user: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_user`}}"
>     password: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_password`}}"
>     database: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_database`}}"
>     port: "repl{{ `external_db_port`}}"

Reviewer 2: just some indentation fixes similar to the other one above since `externalDatabase` is it's own section
```suggestion
externalDatabase:
  host: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_host`}}"
  user: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_user`}}"
  password: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_password`}}"
  database: "repl{{ ConfigOption `external_db_database`}}"
  port: "repl{{ `external_db_port`}}"
```

```

> The HelmChart YAML above results in the following `values.yaml` if the user selects `embeddedDatabase`:

Author: @cbodonnell  I added this in to mirror what we had in the original topic and to clarify what happens when a user selects the embedded database option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The HelmChart YAML above results in the following `values.yaml` if the user selects a `mariadb_type` of `embedded`:
```

```
mariadb:
  enabled: true
```

> For more information about the `optionalValues` property, including details about the when and `recursiveMerge` fields, see [`optionalValues`](https://docs.replicated.com/reference/custom-resource-helmchart#optionalvalues) in _HelmChart_.

Reviewer 2: small one
```suggestion
For more information about the `optionalValues` property, including details about the `when` and `recursiveMerge` fields, see [`optionalValues`](https://docs.replicated.com/reference/custom-resource-helmchart#optionalvalues) in _HelmChart_.
```

## Include Values

> Some advanced use cases involve writing values to a values file only if there is a value to apply. For example, if a customer has the option to configure a different value than the default value in your file, such as setting the database option they want to use. You can include an optional value key so that your application can dynamically add and remove the default value key based on a `when` condition.

Reviewer 2: The general idea as I understand it is that optional values are either included or not included depending on whether the condition is satisfied.  If the condition is not satisfied, the chart value itself is not removed, but instead the optional value provided is not used and it will fall back to whatever the default is (which might be nothing if there is no default).

```suggestion
Some advanced use cases involve writing values to a values file only if there is a value to apply. For example, if a customer has the option to configure a different value than the default value in your file, such as setting the database option they want to use. You can include an optional value key so that your application can dynamically include it based on a `when` condition.
```

Additionally, Helm charts such as Postgres do not treat an empty value (`""`) in the same way as if the key were missing from the chart. This can be necessary for applications packaged as a Helm chart that include a reference to another chart in the `requirements.yaml`.

For example, in the [requirements.yaml](https://github.com/helm/charts/blob/e64112e0913db99227926b49fa0ae59158c9c9d9/stable/sentry/requirements.yaml) of the [Sentry](https://github.com/helm/charts/tree/master/stable/sentry) chart, there is a reference to postgres. This is configured through the [Sentry chart values.yaml](https://github.com/helm/charts/blob/e64112e0913db99227926b49fa0ae59158c9c9d9/stable/sentry/values.yaml#L192):

```yaml
# PostgreSQL chart configs

> postgresql:

Author: This YAML is now configure differently in the Sentry spec, and I'm wondering whether we should update our example and if it impacts our explanation. The new YAML is this:

```yaml
postgresql:
  enabled: true
  nameOverride: sentry-postgresql
  postgresqlDatabase: sentry
  postgresqlUsername: postgres
  # Only used when internal PG is disabled
  # postgresqlHost: postgres
  # postgresqlPassword: postgres
  # postgresqlPort: 5432
```

Reviewer 2: We may want to update these examples in general since `requirements.yaml` is part of the older "v1" helm API that was used with Helm v2 (the [repo](https://github.com/helm/charts) even states that it's no longer maintained).

Bitnami hosts a repository with many "v2" API charts (that go with Helm v3): https://github.com/bitnami/charts
